Testing, testing, one, two, one, two, one, two,
three, four. Hello, hello, testing, one, two,
three, four. Ray's got a little headache with this
sexual orientation, doesn't he? This is August
23rd in the Harrington building, and I have the
honor and pleasure of interviewing Professor
John Hoyle about his three decades or more service
here at A&M. John, to begin with, to introduce
yourself to some stranger who might listen to this
tape or read the transcript, describe your
background before you came to A&M. Where did you
grow up? What did Mom and Dad do? Where did you go to
college? Where were you working before A&M? Okay.
Well, I was born in a small town in Oklahoma, Rush
Springs, Oklahoma, February 2, 1935, born in the
house. The house is still there, still stands in a
little town. And... We moved around quite a lot as a
child because dad trying to find employment and
those kinds of things. But I wound up in high
school, my final two years in high school at Tulsa
Will Rogers High School. My older sister,
Beverly, was two years ahead of me. She finished at
Tulsa Central High School and my younger brother,
Jay, who's two years younger, finished at
Longview High School. They moved again after I
graduated from high school at Tulsa Will Rogers.
And then I made the decision to come to Texas A&M.
One of my classmates' dad, Ted Wrench, his
daughter Dorothy was a high school classmate of
mine. And Ted had seen me play baseball for Tulsa
Will Rogers and knew Bo Bell, the head baseball
coach at Texas A&M. And I got in touch with him, and
they offered me a scholarship. And the former
student association, Tulsa, Oklahoma, paid my
out-of-state tuition. And we came here then. I was
a freshman here in the fall of 1953. Lived in the
athletic dorm, which was in Hart Hall. And all the
athletes were in Hart Hall, in football,
basketball, track, swimming, all of us, which
made it rather interesting. That was before Bear
Bryant came and set up a new athletic dorm,
Henderson Hall, for football. We were all
together there in this hot, forsaken place. I'll
never forget, we drove down all night from Tulsa.
We got into College Station about 3 in the morning.
There was no motel rooms. They were all taken.
About close to 7,000 students that year, and the
Corps was mandatory, which I did not know when I got
here. I didn't know there were no women here. I had
no idea. I had a baseball scholarship. And folks
had driven all night. No place to stay. We'd drive
back to Hearn and get a, it was a big kind of a
boarding house type thing. And we spent two or
three hours sleeping. And then I came on campus the
next morning and met Coach Bell. And part of my job
was to be a Sevesa volunteer, to wait tables in
Sevesa. And I remember I was playing in a baseball
championship in Kansas, a Jayhawk League or a Van
Johnson League, and made a mistake going into a
barbershop and saying, take off my sideburns.
Well, he gave me a burr haircut and skinned the side
of my head to a white wall. And I got to College
Station, and I was a hero among the upperclassmen.
So we started in a corps in A athletics. And that was
my early orientation. Jim Cashin, a local here,
had played football for the Aggies in the 40s. And
his brother, Red Cashin, of course, a famous
football official. He was our dorm advisor. He was
the one to keep all the athletes in some kind of
order And he told me the story later. Mother and Dad
had driven me all the way down here in an old Nash
automobile. And they're getting ready to leave,
and Mother turns over to this very proud Captain
Cashin and said, please take care of my little boy.
And Cashin's laughed about that over the years
because he had to watch me as hard as any of the rest
of them that first year with some of the crazy
antics that we did. But that was sort of an early
orientation of where we came from. where I came
from. Okay, then after you graduated, when? I
graduated in 1957. And then where? Went to Odessa,
Texas. At that time, I was even thinking about
being a pro baseball player. I didn't take a
contract with a corps because I was really
interested in trying to play some professional
baseball. And I had married, and Carolyn was going
to finish that summer at TCU. And so I just decided
to forego the baseball, pro baseball, and took a
teaching and coaching position. And I taught math
and science and coached junior high sports. And
Carolyn taught English in Odessa. And we had our
first child there, Johnny, who's now a counselor
here in the local junior high school in College
Station. And then the military called. Rather
than going in for three years, I went in for six
months. And I was classified as critical skill at
that time, Haskell, because Slick Rutherford was
our area representative. They called him Slick
Rutherford. And the US government then knew we had
to catch the Russians in space. And I was a science
teacher. And I came back to school through the
National Science Foundation to Texas A&M to learn
science. I took courses in physics and so on in
order to teach students and get ready to catch the
Russians in space, which we did. My small part
probably was not very significant, but we did
catch the Russians in space. My mother had been a
constant encourager throughout that. She had
three years of college at Oklahoma College for
Women in Chickasha. She had her teaching
certificate, never taught a day. My dad was a 10th
grade dropout. He was a salesman, wound up with the
home state farm insurance and later American
General. He retired at age 62, and he's 91 now and
still living. Mother died two years ago, but
Mother was the one who really encouraged me
intellectually, academically, got me
interested in music, and that, she's been gone two
years, but she was very much an influence there.
All right, so you taught, this is in the Odessa
system. Odessa, Ector County, Ector County
School District. I was there four years. And then
where? Went to Ector, I mean, went to Midland High
School. I had wanted to be head baseball coach, And
about that time, I had finished up my master's
degree through the National Science Foundation
and got my certification for school
administration. Where? Here at Texas A&M through
Dr. Paul Hensling, who was such an influential
person in my life.
Some of those individuals in education, Walter
was in psychology. Barbel? Walter Barbel. Barbel
was on my committee. And then I was named head
baseball coach at Midland High School. which is
one of my dreams. I wanted to coach, be the head
coach of a high school baseball team. And finished
my master's then about after two years. And the
superintendent out there called me in and says,
John, Dr. Hensling at Texas A&M tells me you're
ready for school administration. Your coaching
days are over. And I was doing pretty well, but I
knew that that was a career I wanted to go. And then I
got really excited. Dr. Hensling says, you need to
go get a PhD. I knew I was a pretty good student. as an
undergraduate. When I really wanted to study, I
could. I could make it. But being an athlete and
looking at pro ball and looking at, you know, where
the women were because there weren't any here and
those kinds of things, I wasn't focused as clearly
as I should have been. But he and others said, John,
you're a good student. Go to Colorado University.
I've done a master's study for Dr. Paul Hensling.
It was a three-hour problems course on Ph.D. and
Ed.D. nationwide. I did that study for Dr.
Hensling. He then put together the proposal for
the Ph.D. program here for Texas A&M University.
And you were involved in that. You were here as dean
of faculties and so on when I was a doctoral
student. And I remember you grading the proposals
for the dissertations. And I remember your
little, I'll never forget this, don't use
one-sentence paragraphs. You said that. And I
never have since that time. I struggled through
three years there. I was able to transfer work from
Colorado University. I started up there, had two
semesters, and A&M's program was approved in 1964
by the coordinating board. Dr. Hensling put it
together with the support of President Rutter and
certainly our dean, Frank Hubert. But he really
was the hammer for getting that Ph.D. program
together. So you got your doctoral degree here? I
got it here. I transferred my work in 1967. I
transferred and worked in Colorado University
and they accepted it in 67. PhD, at that point, I
really enjoyed my research. My research was in the
behavioral science area and applying it to
schools and leadership. And I had a chance then to
become assistant superintendent at Harlingen,
making quite a bit of money, or go to TCU as a
beginning professor for half the salary. Well, I
was teaching, thanks to Dr. Hensling, teaching
undergraduate students in educational
psychology and social foundations. And I really
loved it. I felt like that's where I belong. So TCU
is where we went in 67, January of 67. Stayed there
three years. What was that TCU salary? TCU salary
was $12,500 for 10 1â„2
months. And the assistant superintendency was
$22,500. And that was big money. But I knew there
was something there. And first year, in fact,
Rotary International selected me for some reason
as one of five outstanding young Texans from the
Dallas-Fort Worth, Texas area. And I went to New
Zealand with five other people for four months and
really started getting interested in
international kinds of things. Stayed at TCU two
years, and then I had a postdoc in
computer-assisted learning at TCU. under the
great Dr. Herbert Legron, who was the dean of
education at TCU, brilliant man. And then West
Texas State at the time was trying to start a
computer-assisted large group, small group
educational psychology program. And I went out
there for a year. And from there, I went to Miami of
Ohio, where The dean there, Dean Bogner, and a guy
named Charles Techman, said we want you to write
and publish and learn. We want you to really become
a significant scholar, and we'll protect you from
a lot of the things that young professors have to
put up with. Stayed there four years. Came back
then to Tulsa University in 1974 as department
head, thinking I'd be there forever. Hometown.
Mother and dad lived there. Sister and
brother-in-law lived there. And all of a sudden, I
met a bunch of Texas A&M faculty at a national
meeting, and I'd just been named a good fortune.
Larry Haskew, through his influence at the
University of Texas, he and some others elected me
president of the National Council of Professors
of Administration. And I was really 40, I guess 39,
40 years old. The next thing I know, Dr. Hawkins
here, Harold Hawkins, Frank Hubert, were calling
me and offering me a chance to come and interview
for an open position here in educational
administration, especially in some of the
research, organizational theory, and futures
visioning kind of thing. Well, I came here after
only one year at Tulsa and thinking, well, that's a
quick move. And I was afraid that some of the old
professors remembered me as being not too smart or
not being too brilliant or something. But they had
all either retired or died or something else. And
so we thought it all over, and here I wound up coming
here in the fall of 75. Describe the interview
process. All right. First thing, when I came in, it
was a matter of talking with Dr. Hawkins about the
program. Of course, Dr. Hensling was here, was
pushing me without any question. He thought I
could do no wrong because that's how I felt about
him. And he was pushing me and some of the younger
colleagues my age were pushing me who had seen me at
the national level. Jim McNamara, for instance,
recommended me because of some of my research. And
I met with some of the faculty, and then here I go up
to Frank Hubert. He and Hawkins were together.
Well, I'd worked for Frank Hubert as his assistant
dean, not officially, but assistant graduate
student dean. And he was a little bit
intimidating. And I never knew exactly when I was
around him you know, whether to laugh or be
serious. He was on my doctoral committee as well.
Tough. Do you remember any key questions he asked?
Oh, yeah, yeah. He asked me about my line of
research and wanted to know how I could make that
research relevant to improving schools, those
kinds of things. And then he He said, here are the
courses you'll be teaching, and you've got a tough
act to follow with McNamara. I said, I understand
that. McNamara went off to Columbia for a year and
then came back. And some of those kinds of
questions, I didn't have to make a formal
presentation at the time. And then I said, well,
here's what my salary, here's what I need. And I
said something to the effect that... That this is
what it'll take. And I'm up for full professor at
Tulsa University. I want to be considered for that
when I come here at the end of one year. Well, I
didn't get full professor, but I got tenure at the
end of one year because at that time we had a new vice
president come in here who said there'll be no
Aggies promoted, you know, while I'm here. This is
70. That was 1975, fall of 75. We had a provost and
vice president. Kind of trying to think of his
name. He was in medicine. He was in... Wait, 75?
Yeah, 75. Calhoun was vice president in 75. No, no.
A brand new one. They just put in a brand new one. I
think he was on the State Board of Education later.
I can't think of his name. And you're not thinking
about Winerdi? No, no, when Ernie was assistant or
associate to him at the time. And it's 75. 75.
Because see, Williams is president from 70 to 76.
And Calhoun is serving under him until 77. Yeah,
but there was somebody else that came in in 76.
I can't think of his name. He was sort of a short guy
in medicine. It was at Radar on State Road anyway.
And they said, well, he said, we've recommended
you across the street, but they're not promoting
any ag. I said, well, didn't you tell them I'd been
gone and been away? Well, it was that kind of thing.
And that was the only time I was really upset being
here. But I went ahead and I received tenure. And I
won't ask Sally anymore. What was the beginning
salary here? Twenty, twenty-five, twenty-five.
which represented about a $4,000 raise from Tulsa
University. Did you get the impression that they
were, were you one of a bunch that they were
considering, or did you have the impression they
were trying to attract you? There was not a bunch.
McNamara, who had already developed a pretty good
national reputation, he and I were doing some
similar kind of research. And he told Frank
Hubert, here's the guy. And Frank had such respect
for Jim. It was pretty much a done deal if I could get
enough salary to make it worthwhile and to make the
move because we had a good situation in Tulsa.
Describe moving your family and settling in Bryan
College Station at that time. Okay. We, of course,
it was one of those last, we didn't know until
probably July we were coming. So we started
looking for a place to stay. We found a house down on
Pershing, five bedroom, nice big house that
belonged to an individual in biology who was in
Australia on sabbatical. We leased that house.
Wanted to buy it, but he wouldn't sell it. And so we
built then down Southwood Valley. But I remember
how hot it was. Homer Adams moved us in here. And I
had known him as when I was an undergraduate. And I
just remember how hot it was, how miserable it was.
But the house was air conditioned. It had a nice
shade and all those kinds of things. I couldn't get
any kids in school. See, I had a son who was already,
he'd been a sophomore at Tulsa Memorial, trying to
bring him in as a sophomore. He wasn't too pleased
with that, but it's a lot smaller high school, and
he was a pretty little basketball player, and I was
hoping he would adjust. And he did. My daughter,
though, however, she comes into the schools,
Didn't have any friends. And it was difficult for
her until probably her junior year in high school.
And she doesn't look back on high school with as
much fun. Sometimes it really affects one child
more than it does the other, as you well know. I
don't regret it, but I wish she had had a happier
junior high and high school experience. And I've
often thought, well, maybe I wasn't too sensitive
about that. But anyway. They both graduated from
Texas A&M, and Laura's teaching down in
Friendswood. Her husband, Ross, is an Aggie in
engineering. He's with Hewlett Packard, 14 and
10-year-old grandsons. Son John is here, a
counselor at the junior high, seventh grade, has a
master's degree, a bachelor's here, a master's
from SFA in counseling. His wife, Julie, teaches
at Sam Rayburn in Bryan, two grandkids. Winston is
11, no, 10, playing football, 11. playing
football here at the seventh grade junior high.
I'm going to go out and watch him at four o'clock
today. And then Jennifer started first grade this
year. So we've got four Aggies really. If I could
interview your wife about the move, what do you
think she would say about moving down here then?
Oh, it was home. Her mother and father were still
living. And so it was home because when we came back
to graduate school here, her mom helped us find a
rent house. They were good babysitters and not
only that,
I think during that period of time, I never had to
worry about having a car problem because my
father-in-law, Frenchie Falgo, worked at Hossle
Garage and could fix anything. And as long as it was
his baby's car, she was an only. So it was really,
she was glad to came back because of her family ties
here. And she went to high school in Stephen F.
Austin here in Bryan. So she knew a lot of people.
She immediately got a job. She had finished her
master's at Miami of Ohio. and had a strong English
background, so they hired her at Blinn College,
and she, for 15 years, has been assistant
department head of English and just stepped out of
that this year, and now she's teaching part-time,
teaching two classes a week, but that was really
good for her to come back. I mean, it was
frustrating, but we were still young enough and
had a lot of young friends that we blended in with
the church and We've been a member of the Disciples
of Christ Church, First Christian Church, ever
since we married. So we've been involved in that
ever since we came here. Describe the department
as you arrived and becoming a part of that group.
All right. It was
interesting. It had a split between the
practitioner type, former superintendent type.
like Dr. Henseling, like Dr. Les Richardson. And
then we had a community ed program. Bob Barrage and
others had become kind of nationally well-known
in community ed.
The scholarship and the publications, it was just
beginning with two or three. Phil West was very
good. He was on the staff in terms of scholarship.
But we then After one year, we were able then to
bring in Dr. David Erlandson. And then Jim
McNamara came back the third year. So we began to
develop a really good, solid scholarship and
became more and more prominent across the nation.
And now, of course, we've hired minorities,
women, and really have a fine, diverse faculty and
consider ourselves in the top 10% around the
country. And I think we are. at that time was there
tension in the department between those two
factions? Not so much as there is now. We needed
more tension at the time because here I was trying
to work with the practitioners because I'd known a
bunch of them through my public school days and
also trying to develop my scholarship agenda.
Here I was trying to do both and some weren't
publishing anything And it was awkward, really,
for me to try to move into the academic arena when I
could have gotten by pretty well without doing it.
But I'm glad I continued doing the writing and
publishing. And it's been good. And now it's a real
joy for me to be at the stage in my career where I'm
asked to do articles for referee journals and
chapters for books and books. And I'm pleased to
ask my younger colleagues. I say, hey, I don't have
time to do this. Would you help me do this,
co-author these things? And that's a real joy to
see that happen. Prior to your coming, what was
your most best known research product? I think
probably work I'd done in school climate and our
dealing with school cultures. I had done some
research in some major cities. going and actually
spending time with schools to finding schools
where there really was an open environment for
learning as opposed to a very rigid, structured
kind of learning. I guess I developed that pretty
well. And then it was very soon after that when I was
invited and I got what is known as the National
Professor of the Year honor for American
Association of School Administrators. And in 82,
I went to Washington for four months. and wrote the
first set of guidelines for the preparation of
school administrators, which has evolved into
the new ISLIC state national standards created by
a group from the chief state school officers. And
then I chaired the national commission on
standards for the superintendency. So I've
become known, I guess, by having a lot of support
and a lot of help by this department, Texas A&M.
They've encouraged me. Dr. Hawkins did. David
Erlandson did. And now, of course, Brian Cole
does. They've never tried to get me too tied up with
administration. And I have had chances to become
dean at other places. But I said, well, I want a
career where I can travel, I can write. And now I've
become very fortunate. I've been invited to speak
to a lot of national conferences, futures
conferences. I was lucky enough, fortunate
enough, to keynote the first National
Cooperative Extension Conference in Cincinnati
two years ago on the future envisioning and things
like that. And I'm working now with the College of
Business here on campus with their executive
development programs. And then, as you know, with
FSIS, teaching courses in creative thinking,
problem solving, and coaching kinds of things. So
I'm glad 15 years ago, 20 years ago, when I decided I
don't want to be a dean. I'm glad I made that
decision and stuck with it because a lot of my
friends went dean, then professor, dean, back
professor, and they never did become deans, but
they never did move in the mainstream of their
discipline either. And so I've been lucky there
maybe. I don't know whether I've been a good dean. I
respect people who do become good deans, but those
are the tough decisions that we have in faculty
life because everybody thinks, oh, here's a guy
who can speak well, likes people, he'd be a great
dean. Everybody pushes you to be a dean or be a vice
president or something else. And our
discipline's had a hard time gaining respect
anyway. And so I've tried to be in that fight to say
we have a knowledge base, we prepare leaders as
well as anybody, and here's some of our proof and
our research and those kinds of things. So it's
being proud of our discipline, I guess, and what
we're trying to do has kept me in it. And when you got
here, who was the department chairman? Dr. Hal
Hawkins. And should I say head or chairman? Yeah,
he was head. Yeah. Describe his administrative
style. Well, pretty much down the line, line of
staff like the rest of the department heads were at
that time in the 70s, like Frank Hubert was at the
time. There wasn't a lot of site-based
decision-making. I remember, I could remember,
for instance... kind of bucking the trend, we
wanted to look at our knowledge, what we were
teaching within the college and how it fit with the
national thing. And Dr. Hubert appointed me to a
committee to write a concept paper, as he called
it, on where we are in our discipline. And I tried to
explain all those things. He was on the committee.
And I was still intimidated by him being on that
committee, even though we were so-called equals.
And I'll never forget, he said, I found a
professor. I mean, a person who had been a former
chancellor either at the University of Missouri
or some other institution, this was in the 77 or 8, I
guess, that is retiring from, he may have been head
of the Missouri State Coordinating Board or
something of higher education. So he wants to be a
higher ed prof. I said, excellent. Does he have a
degree in educational administration or in
management? Oh, no, it's in English or something.
And I'll never forget, I said, well, Dr. Hubert,
that's kind of naive, isn't it? You just had me
write a concept paper about what we need to have in
our discipline. You're telling me you want to
bring somebody in or teach higher ed? And you know
what? People around the table thought I was going
to be fired. But he backed off and said, Hoyle's
right. He's got enough courage, enough
conviction what his discipline's all about. And I
really respected him for that, because I thought
he'd really be angry, because he wanted to bring in
a buddy. I think that was somebody that had once
been in Austin while he was over there. I think
you're right. I think you're right. And then he
went to Missouri. I think it was the equivalent of
the head of the coordinating board. Because I
think in Austin he had been the number two or number
three man. Yeah, that's right. That's right. So
the department operated, by and large, strong
leadership. Strong leadership, department head
without question. It wasn't any of this chair
stuff where you rotate it. And y'all were located
where? We were located in, we got, I was, we were in
Harrington. Already? Yeah, we'd already moved
two years before from academic building to
Harrington. And about how many were in the, on the
faculty? There were about seven, maybe eight. We
had probably an adjunct, but probably eight
faculty. And there were undergraduate and
masters? Well, at that point, you see, when I got
back here, the College of Education had the
Department of Educational Administration, all
graduate programs. The undergraduates were in
EDCI, the Career Construction Teacher
Education. And it's the only time I've been able to
work with undergraduates, even though I taught
them at TCU in Miami, Ohio, as when Carolyn, my
wife, and I take kids to Europe for the study
abroad. We've taken three groups of future
teachers to Santa Chiara Study Center in Italy,
where I teach undergraduate courses since I
majored in education here at Texas A&M, not
educational administration. I had a minor in
educational administration, but it really has
helped me now, because I've taught Ed Psych, I've
taught other courses, because I had a good, broad,
liberal education. And I really think in many ways
the early Ph.D. program here in education was
stronger and more, I think, more comprehensive
than our becoming too specialized in curriculum
or in Ed Psych or in administration. They made us go
outside. I took courses from Bard and Nelson. in
sociology, and I took social psychology. I took
philosophy under a new professor of philosophy we
had here, and management under Dr. Rice. I really,
I wanted to, oh yeah, and a great course on great
books from Dean John Paul Abbott. And our students
don't have that opportunity anymore. Our
programs are too tightly organized, and I've,
Most of the students I advise, I try to get them into
philosophy, into the center, into the Bush
Center, into business to expand them a little bit.
Did anyone give you advice as a new faculty member
here? What to do or not to do? No, Dr. Hensling
probably. In sitting with him, just great wisdom
that man had. No, they just assumed I knew what I was
supposed to do. What were your first course
assignments? I picked up the course I'm teaching
right now, The Nature and Problems of
Administrative Behavior, which is